[Music]
hello and welcome to episode 22 of top
cast and today it's an audio-only
podcast there's no video for this one
it's basically about another esoteric
area of philosophy one of my more
favorite papers that David Deutsch has
published over the years the logic of
experimental tests particularly of
Everette II in quantum theory that was a
2016 paper that David published David is
very much the intellectual heir of Papa
so in this episode not only am I going
to be discussing that paper with a few
little embellishments of my own but also
going back to have a look at what Papa
said about many of the same issues
obviously Papa wasn't talking about
Eveready in quantum theory he didn't
understand that he wasn't aware of it he
did struggle to try and understand
quantum theory himself and failed to do
so nonetheless the material here about
the kinds of experiments that exist in
science and how science makes progress
really find their seed in Papa's work
very early on as well right back to his
first book back in 1934 I think it was
the logic of scientific discovery so
we'll come back to that at some point so
this episode is somewhat a standalone
episode but it's also going to serve as
an introduction to chapter 11 the
multiverse which is the next video and
the next podcast that I'll be doing
that's going to spread over at least
three more episodes it's going to be
quite a big one I want to be able to
explain lots of the experiments that
force us to realize that classical
physics just won't cut it in order to
explain what's really going on now the
multiverse which does explain what's
happening in these experiments that I'll
be discussing turns out to be a testable
physics theory it's not a nun
falsifiable interpretation as it's often
claimed to be even some physicists who
purport to support the multiverse as the
way of understanding what happens in
quantum mechanical experiments say the
multiverses unfor
viable which seems to me to be a
contradiction in terms
after all if the results of those
experiments were otherwise there'll be
no reason to invoke the multiverse in
the first place I've heard all sorts of
prominent physicists go so far as to say
the whole principle of falsification ISM
as explained by popper is obsolete
because the quantum multiverse exists or
perhaps other multiverses exists and
because those other multiverses exists
but aren't testable then we can jettison
the falsifiability criterion sometimes
people who follow popper in this regard
about the falsifiability criterion
sidelined as paparazzi as a fan of
popper I'm yet to come across these
people myself you can tell people who
haven't really read popper they are
prone to say things like popper didn't
understand you cannot categorically
refute a theory in science or he didn't
realize that falsification isn't so
straightforward the problem with this is
that popper wrote many many books on
this topic
he didn't merely blog or tweet he wrote
hundreds of thousands of words basically
about critical rationalism epistemology
as applied to everything he considered
very many angles that people could
object to falsification from he
encountered critics in his long life and
he responded to them few stones were
left unturned why he elicits such casual
dismissal among some remains a mystery
whatever the case falsification or
another way of putting this the
experiment is a crucial aspect of
science I should be a little bit clearer
the crucial experiment is a crucial
aspect of science and we'll be talking
today about two different kinds of
experiment that do exist in science
there's the crucial kind the crucial
test being as David describes it the
centerpiece of scientific
experimentation crucial experiments can
be conducted that would if the results
were just so falsify quantum theory or
at least make it problematic people who
try to reject falsification ISM in
science tend to never to grapple with
this idea of the crucial experiment that
could merely make a theory problematic
David has explained two ways the
multiverse can be tested firstly against
so-called collapse interpretations
and secondly against rival theories that
purport that not everything that can
happen does happen so I'll make some
remarks about that first thing against
so-called collapse interpretations today
but will basically be concentrating on
the latter that a crucial experiment
would be able to decide between the
everything that can happen does happen
idea and the idea from classical physics
that basically only one thing ever does
happen and a and in everything that
could possibly happen actually does
happen in physical reality is another
term for Eveready in quantum theory or
the multiverse a falsification in many
ways is just a very simple idea but for
many philosophers and scientists it
seems too difficult an idea and so they
want to jettison it on social media we
often find people rediscovering the
Juhan Quine thesis and we'll be talking
about that today too now the paper that
David wrote in 2016 the logic of
experimental tests I think that if
you're really interested in the
philosophy of science or epistemology
more broadly then you really should read
this it should be required reading for
you yet it is hard going in places and
if you don't have a physics background
you might stumble a some of the
nomenclature and some of the other
formalism that's in the paper but you
can read it more or less by ignoring
those few pieces of mathematical jargon
and quantum physics stuff it's unit what
I want to do here is trying to nude the
paper of some of its jargon and attempt
however poorly to try and reconstruct
some of the arguments I'm going to quote
somewhat from the paper today not not
hugely lengthy quoting so that you can
get a flavor of how clearly David writes
about these issues I really do think
however there's no substitute for
reading the original paper but it's
absolutely seminal work and do consult
the original paper as linked to on my
website I'll have a link to that also
here in the podcasts some of the
material in the paper can of course be
found elsewhere particularly in David's
previous works the fabric of reality
back in 1997 and the beginning of
infinity in 2011 however there's much
that's new in this paper and it
supplements and is supplemented by those
books and some excellent clarifications
of key points in the philosophy of
science and as one
I guess from the title the actual role
of the experiment in the sciences
although the central concern of the
paper is a defense of the role of
explanation in science and so an
explanation both of explanation itself
and the purpose of experimental tests in
science another crucial point emphasized
throughout the paper despite David's
books and comments on the topic is how
quantum theory is fully deterministic
despite what passes for high school and
undergraduate teachings on the subject
and what one finds in popular books and
documentaries and even texts quantum
theory is not a theory about how the
world is governed by laws that are
probabilistic all laws that bring true
objective randomness into the world in
fact there are no truly random processes
there may be subjective randomness we
may not have information within our
universe to know what's going to happen
next that's subjective randomness but
it's all explained by purely
deterministic laws everything is
determined by the quantum mechanical
laws of motion okay in the general
theory of relativity and those laws of
motion specify that what is observed to
occur happens because of everything else
that happens in physical reality that is
to say the laws of quantum theory
predict a prior to an observation
everything physically possible actually
occurs and all those occurrences come to
bear upon the outcome that you do
observe indeed not merely prior to the
observation but during an R for the
observation whatever is physically
possible and can happen at those times
does happen necessarily an observer
finds themselves only in one universe
and therefore observing only one thing
not many things simultaneously
now to my mind this should be no more
mysterious than that observers
necessarily only ever experience a
particular instant in time as well they
never experienced many times
simultaneously although they know that
the past must have happened and that the
future will come and that the past and
future is just as real as the present
the observer can only possibly at any
given moment experience the present now
another way of looking at this and I'm
taking this from an interview that David
gave and I'll link to that interview in
the notes of this podcast is about
trying to just see an object in space
so if we imagine a statue about which a
person can walk and view and from any
angle at any instant the person might be
found north of the statue or south of
it'll west or south west or any position
in a 360 degrees space around the statue
what they cannot do is experience more
than one's perspective on the statue
simultaneously but not without
technology anyway they can't view it
from the north and the south say this is
hardly a deep philosophical problem we
must stand somewhere with respect to the
statue if we wish to view it even from
above we cannot see at all unless and
until we move some places on the statue
are hidden from us yet we know those
places that remain hidden are just as
real as the places we are observing at
some given given instance without those
parts the statue would perhaps topple or
collapse upon itself depending upon how
large and massive a structure it was
what you are able to see depends
entirely on what you cannot see if it's
a real and completes that you're not a
hollowed cast say and we are not
otherwise to see it and this is easy to
check if we just continue to change our
perspective so it is with quantum theory
what happens in the two-slit experiment
for example with single particles is
that all the possible paths are taken
through the apparatus each time a
particle is fired at it but we
necessarily only ever see one and we
know the other possible parts really do
exist because if you repeat the
experiment often enough you will
eventually approximate all those other
parts like slowly walking around the
statue to gain a different perspective
david uses the statue analogy to resolve
some of the mystery about the nature of
time the subjective consciousness of an
observer must experience only the
present moment and not the present past
and future simultaneously for much the
same reason that the statue viewer sees
only one angle of the statue at a time
but I'm using that analogy here in an
attempt to convey that if you take
seriously what the Schrodinger wave
equation predicts about reality then all
physically possible events actually
occur even if you only ever experience
one tiny slice of that reality at any
given moment the statue analogy actually
shows how deep this idea of the observer
having a particular perspective on
reality runs and it must have something
to do with how quantum theory which
explains how an observer finds
themselves only in everyone
universe he's going to be united with
the general theory of relativity which
explains how time is related to space
and the times are just specially cases
of universes the single perspective on
the greater whole that any observer
necessarily has is it once a very simple
common-sense and true way in which we
understand the space and events around
us but it should also be the way in
which we understand better the nature of
time and the nature of so-called
parallel universes not actually parallel
because they can interfere now let me
turn to a little bit of quoting from the
original paper that David wrote and I'll
make some further remarks along the way
so David wrote in this paper I shall be
concerned with the part of the
scientific methodology that deals with
experimental testing but note that
experimental testing is not the primary
method of finding fault with theories
the overwhelming majority of theories or
modifications to theories that are
consistent with existing evidence are
never tested by experiment they are
rejected as bad explanations
experimental tests themselves are
primarily about explanation - they are
precisely attempts to locate flaws in a
theory by creating new expla kanda of
which the theory main turn out to be a
bad explanation end quote
ok so my remarks on that this is a key
theme in the beginning of infinity the
idea that science is all about
experiments is a misconception probably
handed to culture by the education
system indeed it is the case that
experiments are necessary in science but
they are far from sufficient and
although crucial not central to the
whole project the purpose of science is
explanation not experiments David's
about to come to two different types of
experiments that are performed and the
purpose of those experiments but it is
vital here to notice the point bad
theories or silly ideas that purport to
be about the physical world do not need
to be tested to be shown worthless they
can be dismissed outright as bad
explanations without ever being tested
this point was made in the fabric of
reality with the so-called grass cue a
thought experiment if a herbalist comes
to you and says that eating one kilogram
of grass is a cure for the common cold
what's the reasonable response well of
course it's to reject the suggestion but
on what basis surely not that it's and
because it is you could eat a kilogram
of grass if you want to but who would
ever bother doing that what is truly
missing from the grass cure theory is
any explanation how on earth is the
theory supposed to work unless the
herbalist can give an answer that is a
good explanation that explains how the
one kilogram of grass actually interacts
with let's say viruses and destroys them
or otherwise is able to alleviate
symptoms then we know we have an
explanation las' theory and if they do
and this is key such an explanation must
be able to account for why it's exactly
one kilogram and not 0.9 kilograms or
1.1 kilograms or any other of an
infinite number of other explanations of
course I'm just noting here that many
her constant alike do suggest something
akin to grass cures and they do attempt
explanations but they're never good
explanations they're often nonsense they
conflict with some other actual piece of
science so if you just think about
homeopathy for example the idea that
water remembers things that was once
diluted in it so it remembers certain
kinds of medicine once diluted in it
although apparently it forgets the
sewage that was also once in it this
conflicts with the idea that chemicals
are the agents that can actually do a
pharmacological work and not vibration
or other such nonsense like that okay
let me go back to David's paper and
David writes quote scientific
methodology in turn does not nor could
it validly provide criteria for
accepting a theory conjecture and the
correction of apparent errors and
deficiencies are the only processes at
work and just as the objective of
science isn't to find evidence that
justifies theories as true or probable
so the objective of the methodology of
science isn't to find rules which if
followed and guaranteed are likely to
identify true theories as true there can
be no such rules a methodology is itself
merely a philosophical theory a
convention as popper in 1959 put it
actual or proposed there has been
conjectured to solve philosophical
problems and is subject to criticism for
how well or badly it seems to do that
there cannot be an argument that
certifies it as true or probable any
more than there can be for scientific
theories end quote so there David is
pointing out that
in the same way that we can't prove as
true scientific theories we can't prove
as true philosophical theories either we
can't show as true this entire idea
about demarcating science from non
science using the falsification
criterion it's the wrong question you
know how do you know that the
falsification criterion is actually true
well that undermines the whole idea of
critical rationalism where it's all
about finding errors you'd need to find
out what's wrong with the falsification
criterion just more broadly on that
point this is one of the most
contentious pieces of philosophy that
Karl Popper and David Deutsch oh and
he'd a me per period or critical
rationalist proposes about how science
works it's poorly understood and the
opposing worldview is still very much
the dominant philosophy of science even
though it's completely false
the false idea subscribed almost
universally by scientists philosophers
and laymen alike is that science somehow
provides a way of demonstrating that
certain theories are true or close to
true or probably true and moreover that
the more one gathers evidence for some
theory call that theory T then the more
likely T is to be true what David
following popper is saying here is that
there is no such processes that there is
no method in science no set of rules to
follow that can demonstrate theories as
either true or probably true and no
method in philosophy for that matter to
demonstrate that philosophical theories
are true or probably true the whole
purpose of science is not to support
theories with evidence this is a
complete misconception the truth is that
science is about correcting errors in
our explanations this is a completely
different view of science to what most
people have now some admittedly have
read a little bit of popper or maybe
some of david deutsch but are afraid or
perhaps confused about fully taking the
step to actually appreciate the
significance of this and the reason I
say afraid if there is because it seems
to me that some have the concern if they
too strongly endorse even a correct
theory like this one might seem dogmatic
so often people profess to partly
support popper you know that that
falsification is kind of a good idea but
sometimes
we still need confirmations you can't
mix pop Aryan critical rationalism and
falsifiability with any kind of
confirmation or Bayesian ISM they don't
mesh together and reading papa really
illustrates this quite well because
Papa's entire philosophy is about
rejecting the idea that we can be have
true or probably true theories so
there's no way in which we can
simultaneously endorse Papa's idea of
rejecting true and probably true
theories whilst simultaneously accepting
the possibility of true or probably true
theories this would be a perversion of
logic this would simply upset the law of
the excluded middle things cannot both
be true and not true simultaneously I'm
just observing that there are many smart
people any prominently smart people who
struggle to grapple with the centrality
of what science is even all about now
many science today do not want to call
themselves pappi Aryans or critical
rationalist which means they do not want
to endorse the idea that science is not
about supporting theories with evidence
and so they call themselves empiricists
or sometimes bayesian these days now
I've got a detailed critique of Bayesian
ISM as a philosophy of science or as an
epistemology and you can just google my
name Brett Hall Bayesian epistemology
and it will bring up an article about
that not just in brief however a
Bayesian is essentially someone who
thinks that repeatedly observing a
phenomena
allows them to build up a probability
that a particular theory is true so they
can assign a number between 0% and 100%
that a given theory is true or something
like that so if the result of an
experiment continues to come out the
same way the number of the probability
number climbs closer and closer to 100%
but perhaps it can never quite reach
100% maybe these people are fallible us
they they don't think you can be a
hundred percent certain but you can
asymptotically approach that 100 percent
number if you're just interested in
probably true theories perhaps 90% is OK
or 95 percent or perhaps 99.99999 5% at
the five Sigma confidence level if you
understand what that means people in
physics especially astrophysics in
particular make a big deal about the
five Sigma confidence level but one need
only consider the question what
probability would a Bayesian have
assigned to Newton's theory of gravity
being true at any time prior to its
having been found false now if a
scientist were actually amazing in the
year 1900 say then it would seem that
every experiment ever devised to test
utens theory of gravity always
corroborated it Newton's theory
correctly predicted the outcome of every
well designed and executed test prior to
it and in up to and including the year
in 1900 and maybe a little bit later a
Bayesian could do statistics on any
prediction you like and generate some
number and the number will be pushing
their ceiling of the magic 100% Newton's
theory of gravity according to that
philosophy of science would be very very
very close to being certainly true and
yet ultimately it was shown to be false
it was shown false by a crucial
experiment on May the 29th 1919 by the
great physicist Arthur Eddington who
measured the amount of light by which
starlight was bent as it passed by the
Sun during a solar eclipse Newton's
theory predicted one number
Einstein's another the amount of bending
was in agreement with Einstein's theory
of general relativity but not in
agreement with Newton Newton's theory
was then refuted so far from being very
very close to true because of all the
experiments that it had ever predicted
the outcomes of up until then accurately
it was shown false by a crucial test
that pitted it against a rival now
general relativity is in the same
position that Newton's was prior to
around 1900 but it's not probably true
or true or anything like that it
contains some truth and more truth and
Newton's which was closer to true than
any random guess would be but in neither
case can we say that the theory is true
only that it contains some truth we
don't know what truth that is and it
doesn't matter anyway the theories can
be used to help us control reality
around us by making predictions and
helping us to create technology to solve
our problems at any time however to
paraphrase Thomas Huxley the beautiful
theory could be slain by some ugly fact
indeed we have to expect that it will be
at some point general relativity is at
odd
with quantum theory they are mutually
incompatible for reasons that I won't go
into now beyond the scope of my present
piece but in brief the dispute might
come down to a disagreement about
whether the most fundamental parts of
realloc consist of discrete or
continuous quantities david has said in
other places and I agree will be far
better if we had all decided to call
scientific theories scientific
misconceptions to remind ourselves of
how tentative they are and that they
will one day be superseded by some
better misconception back to quoting
David's paper quote expectations apply
only to some physical events not to the
truth or falsity of propositions in
general and particularly not to
scientific theories if we have any
expectations about those it should be
that even our best and most fundamental
theories are false for example since
quantum theory and general relativity
are inconsistent with each other we know
that at least one of them is false
presumably both and since they are
required to be testable explanations one
or both must be inadequate for some
phenomena yet since there is currently
no single rival theory with a good
explanation for all the exploit and err
of either of them we rightly expect
their predictions to be borne out in any
currently proposed experiment end quote
just my exposition on that in other
words although we know at least one but
presumably both of our best deepest
theories of physics are false
there's no rival theory out there to
replace them that can do the job of both
just as well and we must just recall
that when we were a few to theory we did
not discard every single part of the
theory as a rule very much is preserved
a short example from astronomy will
suffice Ptolemy explained that the
universe was geocentric an arrangement
where the earth was the center orbited
by smallest spheres in circles
Copernicus theoretically did away with
parts of this he replaced the earth with
the Sun but he kept the circular orbits
Kepler likewise came and replaced the
circles with ellipses and then Galileo
used observation to show how the
sun-centered model was superior and that
there were objects orbiting Jupiter
Newton then provided a universal
physical law in mathematical form
allowing orbits to be precisely
predicted and finally ironstone showed
how Newton's law was a good
approximation to a better theory of the
behaviorist
spacetime which explained why the pods
around the Sun were how they were so
each new improvement preserved much of
the past and crucially the idea for
example that the orbits were actually
occurring even if what was orbiting what
and why changed as things improved so
refutation of a previously good theory
whether experimental or not does not do
away wholesale with everything that was
valuable in the theory it preserves much
although ultimately demonstrating how
the theory is fatally flawed and
therefore ultimately false with the
proviso as David mentions in a section
I'm about to quote that theories are
never entirely logically contradicted by
some experimental observation but this
is a technical point we can return to
later we also might observe here that
people often object to the quantum
multiverse idea on the basis that well
the next theory that replaces quantum
theory and relativity might do away with
the parallel universes I would find this
as unlikely as the next year of gravity
doing away with orbits or the next
theory of genetics doing away with DNA
more likely that part of the theoretical
apparatus will be retained so DNA will
be retained as in whatever the successor
to genetics is going to be or but will
be retained in whatever the successor to
grab the best gravitational theory will
be and whatever the success of the
quantum theory will be will retain the
idea of many universes back to the paper
short quote from David
he writes quote a test of a theory is an
experiment whose result could make the
theory problematic a crucial test the
centerpiece of scientific
experimentation can on this view take
place only when there are at least two
good explanations of the same exploit
and 'im good that is apart from the fact
of each other's existence ideally it is
an experiment such that every possible
result will make all but one of those
theories problematic in which case the
others will have been tentatively
refuted end quote now this is an
amazingly important and clear
articulation of what experiments are it
experiments test theories but what can
the results do well interestingly if the
result of an experiment conflicts with a
theory it does not necessarily rule out
a theory so take for example the more or
less frequent media hype that can
surround certain high energy physics
observations that are reported quite
often as iron stein proved false perhaps
one of the more famous examples was
about an experiment at the Large Hadron
Collider you can google this one where
neutrinos these little particles
apparently exceeded the speed of light
and that violated special relativity
however it turned out there was a cable
incorrectly connected or somesuch now
the results were actually false the
results of the experiment were false but
even if the results were true even if
the neutrinos were exceeding the speed
of light this would not prove Einstein
false or possibly cause us to reject
relativity theory what it would do is
make relativity theory problematic
relativity theory would still be the
best theory about how fast things can
move and what happens to things as they
move relative to one another
so a test of a theory and experiment
even if it disagrees with the best
theory going it is not a reason to
reject that theory after all if you
reject that theory then what theory
should you use the second best theory
there's almost never a second best
theory but even if there were that
second best theory is second best for a
good set of reasons and if those reasons
include things like it cannot explain
phenomena ABCDE and F well the first
best theory can then this still won't be
a reason to turn to that theory in place
of the first best there is only one way
an experimental test of a theory can
result in us rejecting our best
explanation and that is when we actually
have an equally best rival theory that
explains everything our other best
theory does plus it explains the outcome
of the new experimental test this kind
of experiment is called a crucial test
it is that rare type of test like
Eddington's observation of the bending
of light that allows us to decide
between two theories that make
incompatible predictions about the
outcome of the test but that otherwise
our until that moment equally able to
account for all other phenomena as it is
now of course general relativity is able
to account for far far more than the
mere bending of starlight during
eclipses I've
what Newton's theory can Newton's
universal gravity as brilliant as it is
it could get people to the moon is left
in the distant dust by Einstein's
general relativity who could not only
get us to the moon if we wanted to but
it also gave us GPS it explained neutron
stars predicted the existence of black
holes which were observed and much more
besides none of which Newton's theory
comes close to accomplishing David
rights in the next section quote the
existence of a problem with a theory has
little import besides as I said
informing research programs unless both
the new and the old expla kanda are well
explained by a rival theory in that case
the problem becomes grounds for
considering the problematic theory
tentatively refuted and quote so what
what David's done there is D emphasizing
this supposed centrality of the
experiment to the whole project of
science scientists and knowledge
creation in the form of bold
explanations machine the genuinely
difficult part is positing grand
explanations for what's actually going
on in the world of course those
explanations need to be testable but if
the explanations account for the
phenomena and survived the tests the
explanation then becomes a central
concern of all of civilization who could
condemn a compact achill use of that
science for example to create technology
treat disease solve other problems and
so forth an experiment that disagrees
with some great theory just makes the
theory problematic but if we did find
some experiment that for example could
not be explained by quantum theory say
or seem to refute quantum theory that'll
be a problem for quantum theory but not
a grounds for rejecting it the now
problematic quantum theory would still
be used to create technologies solve
problems essentially everyone would
carry on more or less as before with
respect to the theory and regarded as a
genuine description of reality to some
extent but there would be an unsolved
problem and once more as David observed
previously and we're about to get to as
well
the problem might just be with the
apparatus and if it's not a problem with
the apparatus it could be a problem with
us not understanding some subtlety of
the theory or it could be that the
theory is genuinely not the best theory
because someone somewhere has just
created something better but he's yet to
publish it and when they do
we'll do all the quantum theory ever did
and explain the problematic result the
quantum theory couldn't and in that case
the test that created the problem in the
first place now becomes a crucial test
as David writes quote in contrast the
traditional inductive astir count of
what happens when experiments raise a
problem is in summary that from an
apparent unexplained regularity we are
supposed to induce that the regularity
is universal or according to Bayesian
inductive ISM to increase our credence
for those theories predicting that while
from an apparent irregularity we are
supposed not to drop the theory that had
predicted the regularity or to reduce
our credence for it such procedures
would neither necessitate nor yield any
explanation end quote that's absolutely
crucial under the prevailing view of how
science works if an experiment
critically wounds a theory such that it
is once and for all falsified and so
liable to be rejected then where do we
jump to if we reject our best theory
based upon an experimental refutation
supposedly and there's no rival the
process of rejection does not provide
any new explanation for us the negation
of a theory is not a new theory david
has explained and David writes quote in
any experiment designed to test a
scientific theory T the prediction of
the result expected in Manatee also
depends upon other theories background
knowledge including explanations of what
the preparation of the experiment
achieves how the apparatus works and
sources of error nothing about the unmet
expectation dictates with a T or any of
those background knowledge assumptions
was at fault therefore there is no such
thing as an experimental result
logically contradicting T no logically
entailing a different credence for T as
david writes in a footnote in this paper
that is known as the jew heme Quine
thesis quire 1960 it is true and must be
distinguished from the johan Quine
problem which is the misconception that
scientific progress is therefore
impossible or problematic
end quote now when I first read that
back in 2016 I was so excited because it
was something new I learned about how to
respond neatly to the Jerome coin pieces
objections that are often raised if
anyone gets into discussions about
popper and falsification
it's usually the first thing that comes
up it's usually the first objection that
people have that upon learning the
headline that Papa created the
demarcation criterion of falsification
and that if you falsify a theory if
you're able to falsify a theory with an
experimental test then you've got a way
of distinguishing scientific type
knowledge from other kinds of knowledge
like philosophical knowledge you can do
experiments in science in order to show
things are wrong but sometimes in
philosophy rather often you can't
sometimes in maths you can't sometimes
in morality you can't and in fact in
some of those places it's undesirable to
even try should we really try again to
see if communism works I don't think so
I think there's other reasons to reject
it we don't need to experimentally test
if next time all those people won't be
massacred or all those people won't
starve instead we can refute it based on
argument but here with respect that you
have Quine thesis the thesis itself is
correct but what many people assume
follows from it is not the john klein
thesis is in my words when an experiment
is conducted and the result disagrees
with some theory t-then it's not
logically the case that team must be
false logically it can always be the
case that the experiment was conducted
badly the method wasn't followed on the
method was faulty in the first place the
apparatus was faulty or operating
correctly or some of the background
assumptions were false so some object
using this thesis that there's no such
thing as a crucial test because it might
not be the theory t-that's false but
rather it could be the experimenter or
the equipment that is incompetent sure
so far so good but David's point here is
that Papa's philosophy of science is the
correct epistemology of how science
generates knowledge and although it can
always logically be the case that an
experimental error might be at root a
reason for an apparently problematic
observation this does not have any
lasting effect on how science makes
progress scientific progress actually
happens in spite of this as with the
faster-than-light neutrinos it might
have been the case that the observation
was a problem for relativity or it might
have been background assumptions in the
form of badly connected cables that
turned out to be the case as Jim Cline
warned it always could be and that had
no bearing on the methodology of science
in
it is the methodology of good science
that uncovers such problems in the first
place and allows things to keep moving
in the right direction so just to
emphasize that again the fact that a
single experimental test
apparently disagrees with your theory so
you've apparently observed something
moving faster than the speed of light
this is a problem for general for
special relativity and general CP it's a
problem for an Einstein's relativity so
what so what
continue to repeat the experiment in
many many different ways and you might
just find out that your cables weren't
connected correctly and so you've used
the critical method you've still used
properly and epistemology you've been
critical of the criticism you've
criticized the criticism the criticism
was there's neutrinos there's the
particles traveling faster than the
speed of light and this appears to be a
problem for special relativity
well now let's criticize that
observation let's see if that
observation stands up to being repeated
by many different teams around the world
or replicated by any other group of
physicists and if it's not then the
problem is not with relativity the
problems with your experiment and that
has been found by the method of
falsification we've falsified the bad
observation back to quoting david quote
but as i have said an apparent failure
of t's prediction is merely a problem so
seeking an alternative to T is merely
one possible approach to solving it and
although there are always countless
logically consistent options for which
theory to reject the number of good
explanations known for an explication is
always small things are going very well
when there are as many as two we've
perhaps the opportunity for a crucial
test more typically it's 1 or 0 for
instance when neutrino has recently
appeared to violate a prediction of
general relativity by exceeding the
speed of light no good explanation
involving new laws of physics was in the
event created and the only good
explanation turned out to be that a
particular optical cable had been poorly
attached see atom at all 2012 end quote
so what I'd like to say about that is
that forming theories to explain things
adequately is very hard it is a highly
creative process that takes
understanding what seems to be happening
in the world
and how to communicate the idea clearly
in a language others will understand
sometimes though this is not necessary
it can require appreciating some of the
current series and what problems there
are with them in short it requires
background knowledge and then lots of
imagination so because of some of these
factors there is a poverty of good
explanations in the world but a
proliferation of false and bad ones now
here I just want to turn to a section of
the paper that I won't quote but instead
will put into my own words about the
special case of quantum theory and this
is really important and this is probably
I guess the center of the bullseye as to
why I'm doing this podcast now because
as I say in the next three episodes of
tock cast especially the video version
we're going to be talking about this and
so if you've got two explanations say
we've got explanation capital e and that
it that's an explanation for everything
happens the everything happens
explanation everything possible happens
technically speaking everything
physically possible happens so let's
call that a it's a theory about what can
possibly happen so the everything
physically possible happens theory means
that a happens and B happens and C
happens and so on all these things
actually happen okay now we're gonna put
that up against another theory call that
explanation D an explosion D only
predicts that one thing happens X so if
that one thing that D predicts happens
over and over and over again when you
perform an experiment well the
interesting thing is that E the
everything possible happens theory is
not refuted by experiment because it
also predicts that that thing should
happen as well as everything else but
what it cannot explain and what II
cannot explain is why only that thing
should happen while D does explain why
that one thing happens and only that one
thing happens so although experiment
can't refute e in that way the fact it's
a bad explanation does of course if
something else happens like B rather
than X then D is roundly refuted but E
is not the strange thing here is that
even if X is observed every single time
which makes B a power
any more accurate he might still be
actually true or closer to true he might
still be the best theory or closer to
being the true theory it could just be a
coincidence that X happens all the time
but that's a poor explanation and this
is why poor explanations might still be
more true than good explanations as
David says at the very beginning of his
paper II could be augmented with G where
G explains why X is found to occur every
single time okay are quite a little bit
of David here and he writes quote thus
it is possible for an explanatory theory
to be refuted by experimental results
that are consistent with its predictions
in particular the everything possible
happens interpretation of quantum theory
to which it has been claimed that
everything in quantum theory is
equivalent could be refuted in this way
provided as always that a suitable rival
theory existed and hence it is testable
after all therefore the argument that
I've already in quantum theory is itself
untestable fails at its first step and I
shall show in Section eight that it is
in fact much more testable than any mere
everything possible happens theory end
quote
okay in just my remarks on that as
David's about to explain in a quote I'm
about to provide but let me emphasize
the multiverse theory is testable
because it predicts that for example all
possible paths are taken by particles
through a double-slit apparatus
experiment and that is exactly what we
observe when we repeat the experiment
again and again with lots of particles
if the particles were instead just over
and again striking the screen in one
place you know point X point X point X
point X the electrons are go the photons
are going through the double slit
apparatus and just hitting the same
point again and again and again we could
refute the everything possible happens
multiverse theory because strings like
that are not expected as david says
quote this is because a string of
repeated observations like X is not
expected to happen even though it
asserts that everything including that
string actually does happen this is no
contradiction being expected is a
methodological attribute of a possible
result depending for instance on whether
a good explanation for it exists while
happening is a factual one
what is at issue in this paper is not
whether the property's expected to
happen and will happen are consistent
but whether they can both follow from
the same deterministic explanatory
theory in this case II under a
reasonable scientific methodology and I
have just shown that they can end quote
so that everyone would same settles that
the multiverse theory is testable now
I've got a few more little quotes here
they'll provide I just might make her a
remark on the further testability of
multiverse theory now as far as I know
the first time it was published was in
1984 in a paper that David wrote and in
that paper he discussed an experiment
that could be performed an interference
experiment using artificial intelligence
technology this was also later published
in a popular science book by Paul Davies
and I think it's John Brown Julian Brown
and they wrote a book called the ghost
in the machine where they interviewed a
wide variety of physicists about their
understandings of quantum theory and
this is one of the first times I
encountered David Deutsch in fact now in
that book David also gives a lovely
popular account of the experiment that
could be performed that would refute all
collapse theories or other theories
about quantum theory all other
interpretations of quantum theory and
not refute the multiverse version of
quantum theory ok but back to this paper
for now quote from David quote
explanation itself cannot be defined
unambiguously because for instance new
modes of explanation can always be
invented for example Darwin's new mode
of explanation did not involve
predicting future species from past ones
disagreeing about what is problematic or
what counts as an explanation will in
general cause scientists to embark on
different research projects of which one
or both may if they seek it there are no
guarantees provide evidence by both
their standards that one or both of
their theories are problematic
there is no methodology that can validly
guarantee or promise with some
probability
that following it will lead to truer
theories as demonstrated by countless
examples of which Kwan's is one but if
one adopts this methodology for trying
to eliminate flaws and deficiencies then
despite the opportunities for good-faith
disagreements that criteria are that the
criteria still allow one may exceed in
doing so end quote and I think that's
really important I have read some
criticism of David's criterion for what
constitutes a good explanation that
being that hard to vary is not well
defined but there we find a good
response new types of explanations can
always be created not only simply new
explanations ok new types of explanation
you modes of explanation and so a
definition that is only ambiguous could
rule out legitimate explanations to come
in the future and so that's why hard to
very can't be constrained too much we're
certainly after hard to very
explanations but if we make hard - very
- hard - very then we won't allow for
new modes of explanation in the future
going back to quoting the paper from
David quote we have become accustomed to
the idea of physical quantities taking
random values with each possible value
having a probability but the use of that
idea in fundamental explanations in
physics is inherently flawed because
statements assigning probabilities to
events or asserting that the events are
random form of a deductively closed
system from which no factual statement
statements about what happens physically
about those events follows papen our
2002 for instance one cannot identify
probabilities with the actual
frequencies and repeated experiments
because they do not equal them in any
finite number of repeats and infinitely
repeated experiments do not occur and in
any case no statement about frequencies
in an infinite set implies anything
about a finite subset unless it is a
typical subset but typical is just
another probabilistic concept not a
factual one so that would be circular
hence not with staying at they are
called probabilities the PI in a
stochastic theory will be purely
decorative and hence the theory would
remain a mere something possible happens
theory were it not for a special
methodological rule that is usually
assumed implicitly end quote okay and so
there David's talking about the
physical reality or otherwise of
probabilities and he's done a wonderful
lecture about this that can be found on
his own website and I think the
constructive theory website about the
physics of probability I think it's
called something like that and he's
quite right here about the about the
philosophical difficulties of applying
probabilities in real life so for
example if we take a coin and it's a
fair coin a supposedly fair coin and
we're flipping it now we expect to flip
it out of a hundred times that expect 50
times heads and 50 times tails it's very
rare that ever actually comes up you're
close to that and you get asymptotically
closer to the 50-50 over time but you
never get exactly 50/50 and we wouldn't
expect in truth to get exactly 50/50 but
rather something close to 50/50
you know 47:53 or something like that
would still comport with our general
understanding of probability but in what
way does probability refer to real life
if you're not getting exactly 5050 every
single time you throw a fair coin a
hundred times what does that mean what
does it mean to say that it always comes
up 50% heads and 50 percent tails when
it doesn't it means that it's supposedly
one view of probability is if you were
to throw it an infinite number of times
then 50% of those would be heads and 50%
tails but that's a none for supply ball
claim it's not a it's not a claim about
physical reality if you want to make a
claim about physical reality then the
claim has to be testable but you can't
possibly test an infinite number of
throws of the coin so that seems to be a
problem for probability and David deals
with this in his talk which I recommend
to everyone okay and just as a almost as
a postscript here did popper reverse a
falsification was sufficient to
establish a theory as scientific not at
all the logic of scientific discovery is
needed 500 pages and defends the
criteria of demarcation among other
things in that book he also details what
crucial experiments are he settle this
back in the 1930s and there's a free
version of the logic of scientific
discovery online you can just look for a
PDF version
and that was published in 1959 so it's
got some updates from Papa himself David
and others have said it again and I say
now Papa understood that any purported
falsification could mean one of two
things logically it could mean the
theory is false
well the experiment was flawed but this
is not a problem for science we we make
progress by refuting theories in this
way regardless what we did not do is
confirm we are correct chapter four of
the logic of scientific discoveries in
fact titled falsification ISM if it was
as simple as some people seem to think
or popper was as naive as some people
seem to think one might expect that
chapter to run to a few sentences or
maybe a couple of paragraphs but no
popper spends pages 57 through 273
defending his thesis against all manner
of objections and he doesn't stop there
the whole point is that here's
epistemology his philosophy of science
has not summed up by those 16 pages it
is summed up rather well by the other
486 falsification is but a part of the
greater whole
Papa was dealing with problems in
science what did it mean for edingtons
experiment to refute mutant but not
Einstein was Einstein considered true
now and Newton false was that it was
Einstein simply more probably true could
we measure that probability one could
well spend many episodes of a podcast
like this doing little more than
discussing Papa's epistemology as
explained in the logic of scientific
discovery perhaps one day I will vz4 he
seems to me to be such an underrated
genius that's so many claimed to have
read and yet it seems to me I've
misunderstood entirely it is as if those
16 pages about falsification ISM in the
logic of scientific discovery were only
16 words and at the rest of the chapter
didn't exist much less the rest of the
book and much less all of these other
books and dozens of academic papers
journal articles and lectures but it
continues to be painted as naive or not
anticipating aspects of science
difficult to test in practice those who
try to explain his ideas more fully than
the caricature that often passes for
popularizing of popper are often
ridiculed as the paparazzi I've heard
recently that kind of reaction against
popper is an entirely unique and
philosophy but it is almost rather
unique to philosophy although not
completely because physics suffers from
this as well many physicists when you
talk to them can tell funny stories of
emails received from someone or other
who claims to have for example proven
Einstein wrong perhaps with an algebraic
proof such people who claim to have
proven Einstein on really go to the
trouble of trying to engage with the
experiments they look at the mathematics
and refuse to believe that their
common-sense notion could possibly be
false Galilean relativity they think
must somehow be at base true so they try
their hand at a mathematical disprove
but they've engaged only with the
Lorentz transformation for example the
very basics of special relativity they
prove somehow the speed of light is not
constant physicists know the feeling of
dealing with these people and they
chuckle with each other about such
stories or from the next inventor who
sent them an idea for a perpetual motion
machine or what not these people haven't
actually read much of relativity or
about the conservation of energy they've
read perhaps a popular account or picked
up a high school text and learned enough
to attribute to Einstein only part of
the story to those business I say that
cranky engineer has a counterpart in
philosophy they are the people who've
read the popular account it happens with
many prolific writers who solve deep
problems because the problem is deep and
the solution often subtle it can be
tempting to shoot off a blog post or an
email or a tweet about how Einstein was
wrong that relativity meant the speed of
light is constant or that time slows
down the greater one's velocity is it's
a tempting prospect for someone new to
the field or a casual reader of the
field it's so tempting it might even
cause someone to write a blog post about
how popper was wrong about falsification
and those that have read beyond the
popular in headlines are terribly naive
about how science actually works so let
me leave this episode with some words
directly from popper himself I'm gonna
read from unending quests an
intellectual autobiography on page 42
popper writes there that quote my main
idea in 1919 was this if somebody
proposed a scientific theory he should
answer as Einstein did the question
under what conditions would I admit that
my theory is untenable in other words
what conceivable facts would I accept as
refute
patience or falsifications of my theory
I'm skipping a little any he write any
rights it says I still uphold this but
when a little later I tentatively
introduced the idea of falsifiability or
testability or refute ability of a
theory as a criterion of demarcation I
very soon found that every Theory can be
immunized this excellent term is due to
Hans Albert against criticism if we
allow such immunization then every
theory becomes unfalsifiable thus we
must exclude at least some immunizations
so I just pause there and quote
that's 1919 in 1919 he is already
considering objections to the falsify
crack falsification criterion the people
today who claim that falsification is
too simple an idea in the philosophy of
science and attribute and moreover
attribute that position to Papa huh
haven't read Papa given that he
considers these so-called immunizations
given that he considers ways in which
the falsification criterion can itself
be problematic and not as
straightforward as a naive or
suffocation esteem it--think so I'll
continue to read Papa on the other hand
I also realized that we must not exclude
all immunizations not even all which
introduced and hoc auxilary hypotheses
for example the observed motion of
uranus might have been regarded as a
falsification of newton's theory
instead the auxilary hypothesis of an
outer planet was introduced ad hoc thus
immunizing the theory this turned out to
be fortunate for the auxilary hypothesis
is a testable one even if difficult to
test and it stood up to tests
successfully all this shows not only
that some degree of dogmatism is
fruitful even in science but also that
logically speaking falsifiability nor
testability cannot be regarded as a very
sharp criterion later in my logic de
Foix own logic of scientific discovery I
dealt with this problem very fully I
introduced degrees of testability and
these turned out to be close to
related to degrees of content and
surprisingly fertile increase of content
became the criterion for whether we
should or should not tentatively adopt
an auxilary hypothesis in spite of the
fact that all this was clearly stated in
the logic of scientific discovery of
1934 a number of legends were propagated
about my views they still are first then
I introduced falsifiability as a meaning
criterion rather than as a criterion of
demarcation secondly that I had not seen
that immunization was always possible
and had therefore overlooked that since
all theories could be rescued from
falsification none could simply be
described as falsifiable in other words
my own results were in these legends
turned into reasons for rejecting my
approach end quote
and I'll just make this personal
reflection here on this idea that it's a
very simple concept that Papa pointed
out that the criterion of demarcation is
not a criterion of meaning so although
he was saying that this separates
science from non science that the
ability to do an experiment demarcates
the scientific enterprise from other
kinds of knowledge it's not saying that
nothing else has any meaning or isn't
useful quite the contrary
after all pop was very interested in
political philosophy political science
or political philosophy we should say
and and morality
he didn't think those things were
meaningless he didn't think that
philosophy was meaningless that's what
he was spending most of his time on
those things are important so when
people talk about let's say multiverse
theories that are not the quantum
multiverse Theory these cosmological
multiverse theories the theory of our
hoed call it the mega verse okay the
idea that there are other universes out
there that have different physical laws
this is a very different kind of
multiverse to the multiverse that
quantum theory forces us to understand
the world through these other mega verse
theories where there might be universes
out there were different physical laws
there are some physicists who are very
upset about the fact that these might be
ruled out of science now I would rule
them out of science I would say well
they're not testable there's no testable
prediction
but there are scientists there are
physicists who say well this is a
problem for the demarcation criterion
this is a problem for falsification
because we should be able to call these
theory scientific why I don't understand
the problem like what they're upset by
is that we're going to regard such a
theory a theory of other universes with
different physical laws as metaphysical
and that somehow that is in a way
lessening that theory no it's not you
can still go on and do your mathematics
and do your physics of these alternate
theories of these other kinds of
multiverse in fact you can you can you
can test them in a certain way some
people might be interested in the work
of cosmologists Luke Barnes he's from
Australia and one of his projects is
actually to look at the question of
fine-tuning and I think he's not the
only one there are other physicists who
do this kind of thing other cosmologists
who do this kind of thing and they use
computers they use supercomputers and
simulations of universes with different
laws of physics and see what happens in
there so to a certain extent they're
kind of testable let's see what happens
in such a universe where you've got
different physical laws and they do this
for the purposes of fine-tuning are any
of those universes that they simulate
able to support complex chemistry life
and so on whatever the case it's no
insult to call a particular theory or
idea metaphysical it's no insult
it's scientism rank scientism to insist
that if your theory cannot be tested by
experiment that it nonetheless should be
regarded as science then you've got a
bias you think that scientific knowledge
is in some ways superior to better then
certain other kinds of knowledge which
might be very legitimate here's a
metaphysical theory reality exists the
universe really exists it's not just all
being dreamed by you
that's a metaphysical theory that's not
a scientific theory there's no
experiment that I can do to test whether
or not I'm dreaming right now or not
maybe when I go to sleep at night and
have a dream I'm dreaming within a dream
I'm already here in a dream or maybe I
exist inside of a simulation
these are metaphysical theories my claim
that all of that is nonsense that we are
not dreaming we're not in a simulation
there's not an evil demon deceiving us
my theory that all of that is quite
correct that none of this is true
that in fact reality just is and we
exist inside reality that metaphysical
theory is just as important as any
scientific theory and I'm willing to
defend that metaphysical theory and it's
no insult to call it metaphysical it's
no insult to call a certain theory a
moral theory or a mathematical theory
metaphysics isn't an insult now
pseudoscience is an insult but I
wouldn't regard ideas about other
universes with different physical laws
as being pseudoscience it's legitimate
area to investigate it could be fun
philosophically interesting you don't
have to call it science and importantly
you don't have to go throwing away the
criterion of falsifiability because
there's one very esoteric area of
theoretical metaphysical cosmology that
you happen to enjoy doing and exploring
and thinking about it's only ever and
I'll just end on this it's only ever the
theoretical physicists that have a
problem with the falsification criterion
the ornithologists aren't worried the
geologists aren't concerned the
pharmacologists don't get into these
debates it's only the theoretical
physicists that get upset at popper and
that should be very very telling it's
because they operate right at the very
margins of what science can do and
that's great that's great they need to
be keep pushing those boundaries but
they have to recognize when things are
testable and when things aren't testable
because if they're not testable then
their ideas can't be handed over to the
managers of the Large Hadron Collider or
to the people in charge of the Hubble
telescope there's no observation that
can ever show
that any of their ideas are wrong and if
they can't well you're doing metaphysics
it could be interesting could be
entertaining could even inform research
projects in real science but it's not
science and it's no big deal anyway
there we have it in Papa's own words
that he wasn't an ayah falsification
estndar stand at all he understood the
objections he spoke with scientists
including physicists he spent his life
defending that thesis and if you take it
seriously and really investigate it and
think of all the ways it critical
rationalism might be false and then read
what he said in his own words he just
might be convinced he was right
rather than convinced he was mistaken by
a headline in a brief article that
mangles what he meant in order to refute
a straw man if you're getting value out
of these podcasts on my YouTube videos
or website why not consider donating
I've never got a patreon account at Brit
are Hall all one word so that's Bret are
are for robert hall all one word or if
you go to my website www.timeforhope.org
[Music]
you